# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.1 Our First Program

In C++, every expression has a type. Sometimes we as programmers have to declare the type explicitly and other times the compiler can deduce it for us.

KDevelop is a free IDE from the KDE community written in C++. It is probably the most efficient IDE on Linux and integrates well with git, subversion, and CMake.

## 1.2 Variables

```c++
double x = -1.5e6; // -1500000
```

- The non-decreasing length property:
  - char <= short <= int <= long <= long long
  - float <= double <= long double
  - Typical float: 32 bits; double: 64 bits; long double: 128 bits

### 1.2.1 Intrinsic Types

Using char or unsigned char for small numbers, however, can be useful when there are large containers of them.

### 1.2.2 Characters and Strings

```c++
char name[8] = "Herbert";
```

**Danger:** 

1. These old C strings all end with a binary 0 as a char value. If the 0 is missing, algorithms keep going until the next memory location with a 0-byte is found. 
2. Appending to strings would corrupting memory or cutting off  longer strings

C++ 14: differentiate char array and string with the suffix s, e.g., "Herbert"s. 

### 1.2.3 Declaring Variables

**Declare variables as late as possible**

C++11 can deduce the type of a variable for us with `auto`. 

### 1.2.4 Constants

Values already known during compilation --> enables optimizations

### 1.2.5 Literals

Every number with a dot or an exponent (e.g., 3e12 ≡ 3· 10^12) is considered a double.

```c++
std::complex<float> z(1,3, 2.4), z2;
z2 = 2 * z; // Error: 2 is not float
z2 = 2.0f * z; // Correct
```

```c++
long double third1 = 0.3333333333333333333;     // may lose digits
long double third2 = 0.3333333333333333333l;    // accurate
```

Integer literals starting with a zero are interpreted as octal numbers

```c++
int o1 = 042; // 34
int h1 = 0x42; // 66
```

C++14 introduces binary literals, which are prefixed with 0b or 0B.

To improve readability of long literals, C++14 allows us to separate the digits with apostrophes:

**C++17** allows us to write hexadecimal floating-point literals: 

```c++
float f1 = 0x10.1p0f; // 16.0625 * 2^0 = 16.0625
double d2 = 0x1ffp10; // 511 * 2^10 = 523264
```

### 1.2.6 Non-narrowing Initialization (C++11)

Values in braces cannot be narrowed:

```c++
long l{1234567890123};

int il = 3.14 // can compile
int iln{3.14} // Narrowing ERROR: fractional part lost

unsigned u2 = -3 // can compile
unsigned u2n{-3} // Narrowing ERROR: no negative values
```

### 1.2.7 Scopes

**Do not use global variables. Unless it is a global constant.**

When a variable with the same name exists in nested scopes, only one variable is visible. The variable in the inner scope hides the homonymous variables in the outer scopes (causing a warning in many compilers). --Hiding

In fact, the visibility is the lifetime minus the time when it is hidden. Defining the same variable name twice in one scope is an error.

Static variables: live until the end of the execution but are only visible in the scope. 

**A better solution to manage nesting and accessibility is namespaces.**

