# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.3 Operators

### 1.3.1 Arithmetic Operators

The increment and decrement operations need something that is modifiatble and addressable.

```c++
(3+5)++; // ERROR: 3+5 is only a temporary
```

Prefix operators return the modified value and postfix the old one. However, it is better to refrain from using increment and decrement and to replace it with `j+1`. 

### 1.3.2 Boolean Operators

C++20 Three-way comparison: x <=> y

```
(A <=> B) < 0 is true if A < B
(A <=> B) > 0 is true if A > B
(A <=> B) == 0 is true if A and B are equal/equivalent.
// Source: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/3-way-comparison-operator-space-ship-operator-in-c-20/
```

**Always use bool for logical expressions.**

### 1.3.5 Program Flow

**Comma Operator:** Evaluate first the subexpression to the left of the comma and then that to the right of it. The value of the whole expression is that of the right subexpression.

```c++
3+4, 7*9.3; // the result of the expression is 65.1
```

### 1.3.8 Type Handling

C++98

- Run-time type identification: typeid(x)
- Identification of a type: typeid(t)

- Number of arguments: sizeof...(p)
- Number of type arguments: sizeof...(p)

C++11 

- Alignment of object: alignof(x)
- Alignment of type: alignof(t)

### 1.3.12 Avoid Side Effects!

Some quite tricky stuff might work but much simpler things might not. Even worse, something might work for a while until somebody compiles it on a different compiler or the new release of your compiler changes some implementation details.

The eagerness to shorten code as much as possible dates back to the times of early C when typing was more demanding, with typewriters that were more mechanical than electrical, and card punchers, all without a monitor. With today’s technology, it should not be an issue to type some extra letters.

As a rule of thumb: more comprehensible programs have a better potential for optimization. Speaking of which, const declarations not only protect us against accidental modifications, they are also an easy way to enable more optimizations.

