# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.5 Functions

### 1.5.1 Arguments

Temporary variables -- like the result of an operation -- cannot be passed by reference.

Larger data structures like vectors and matrices are almost always passed by reference to avoid expensive copy operations.

Constant reference: pass variables without bearing the risk of accidentally overwriting it.

```c++
double two_norm(const vector& v) {...}
```

- Arguments passed by value: function works with a copy
- Arguments passed by reference: function works directly on the argument
- Const references allow for passing temporaries

Default variables -- can declare multiple ones but only at the end of the parameter list.

### 1.5.2 Returning Results

The only thing that can appear in the return statement of a void function is t**he call of another void function**. 

### 1.5.3 Inlining

Why inlining: calling a function is relatively expensive: registers must be stored, arguments copied on the stack, and so on. When called inlined, the function call is substituted with the operations contained in the function. 

However, the compiler is not obliged to inline. It can inline functions without the keyword if this seems promising for performance. 

Another use of inline declaration: to include a function in muptiple compile units. 

### 1.5.4 Overloading

Problematic example: 

```c++
void f(int x) {} // #1
void f(int& x) {} // #2
void f(cost int& x) // #3
  
int main() {
  int i = 3;
  const int c1 = 3;
  f(i); // #1 and #2 are equal matches
  f(ci); // #1 and #3 are equal matches
  f(3); // #1 and #3 are equal matches
}
```

Mixing overloads of reference and value arguments almost always fails. Thus, **when one overload has a refernce qualified argument, the corresponding argument of the over overloads should be reference quelified as well**. 

Solution: Omit the value-argument overload. Then `f(3)` and `f(ci)` will resolve to the overload witht the constant reference and `f(i)` to that with the mutable one. 