# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.6 Error Handling

### 1.6.1 Assertions

We should not remove the assertions even after we fixed the bugs. 

A great advantage of assert is that we can let it disappear entirely by a simple macro declaration. Before including \<cassert> we can define NDEBUG, and all assertions are disabled. 

```c++
#define NDEBUG
#include <cassert>
```

Software with assertions in critical kernels can be slowed down by a factor of two or more when the assertions are not disabled in the release mode. Good build systems like CMake activate `-DNDEBUG` automatically in the release mode's compile flags. 

**Defensive Programming: Test as many properties as you can.**

### 1.6.2 Exceptions

Traditional solution: return error codes

**C++17** Introduces the attribute `[[nodiscard]]` to state that the return value should not be discarded. Each call that ignores the return value will cause a warning. 

```c++
[[nodiscard]] int read_matrix_file(const char* fname, matrix& A);
```

Thrwoing exceptions: C++ allows us to throw everything as an exception: strings, numbers, user types, etc. However, for dealing with the exceptions properly it is better to define exception types or to use those form the standard library. 

```c++
struct cannot_open_file {};

matrix read_matrix_file(const std::string& fname) {
	fstream f(fname);
	if (!f.is_open()) 
		throw cannot_open_file{};
	...
}

int main() {
	...
	try {
		A = read_matrix_file("does_not_exist.dat");
	} catch (const cannot_open_file& e) {
		...
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
	}
}
```

Note: the function `exit()` (from \<cstdlib>) ends the execution even when we are not in the main function. It should only be used when further execution is too dangerous and there is no hope that the calling functions have any cure for the exception either. Alternatively, we can continue the execution by rethrowing the exception, which might be dealt with later. 

```c++
try {
	A = read_matrix_file("does_not_exist.dat");
} catch (const cannot_open_file& e) {
  ... // some partially rescue
  throw;
}
```

#### Advantages of Exceptions

Error handling is necessary when our program runs into a problem that cannot be solved where it is detected. Thus, we must communicate this to the calling function. It is possible that the direct caller of the problem-detecting function is not able to handle the issue either, and the issue must be communicated further up the call stack over several functions. 

#### C++11 Who Throws?

C++11 added a new qualification for specifying that no exceptions must be thrwon out of the function, so that the calling code never needs to check for thrown exceptions after `square_root()`. 

```c++
double square_root(double x) noexcept {...}
```

**Reader notes** `noexcept` is somehow similar to `const`. The difference between them is that, if a function with `noexcept` throws an exception, it would be aborted in runtime and there would be a warning during compilation:

```c++
int f() {
    return 1;
}
 
void no_throw() noexcept {
    int a = f();
    if (a != 1) {
        throw -1;
    }
}

int main() {
    no_throw();
    cout << "no problem!" << endl; // program runs successfully since the exception is not thrown
}

// Compiler messages: 
// main.cpp: In function 'void no_throw()':
// main.cpp:13:9: warning: 'throw' will always call 'terminate' [-Wterminate]
//    13 |         throw -1;
//       |         ^~~~~~~~
```

In this way, a function with `noexcept` does not require all of its callees to be `noexcept` as well, and there is no compiler warning even if a callee contains code of throwing something. 

#### C++11 Static Assertions

Program errors that can already be detected during compilation can raise a `static_assert`. In this case, an error message is emitted and the compilation stopped. 

```c++
static_assert(sizeof(int) >= 4, "int is too small");
const int capacity = 70000;
```

