# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.7 I/O

A stream is an object where a program can either insert characters or extract them. 

### 1.7.1 Standard Output

Difference between `endl` and `\n`: `endl` flushes the buffer while `\n` does not.

- Flushing help us when we are debugging (without a debugger) to find out between which outputs the program crashes. 
- However, when a large amount of text is written to files, flushing after every line slows down I/O considerably. 

### 1.7.2 Standard Input

Inputs of two `cin`s can be separated by any valid blank separator: a space, a tab or a newline. 

### 1.7.3 Input/Output with Files

C++ edtablishes a general stream concept that is satisfied by an output file and by `std::cout`: 

```c++
#include <fstream>

int main ()
{
    std::ofstream square_file;
    square_file.open("squares.txt");
    // short version: std::ofstream square_file{"squares.txt"}; 
    for (int i= 0; i < 10; ++i)
        square_file ≪ i ≪ "^2 = " ≪ i*i ≪ '\n';
    square_file.close(); // only needed when the file should be closed before it goes out of scope. 
}
```

### 1.7.4 Generic Stream Concept

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <sstream> 

void write_something (std::ostream& os)
{
    os ≪ "Hi stream, did you know that 3 * 3 = " ≪ 3 * 3 ≪ '\n';
}

int main (int argc, char * argv[])
{
    std::ofstream myfile{"example.txt"};
    std::stringstream mysstream; 

    write_something(std::cout);
    write_something(myfile);
    write_something(mysstream); 

    std::cout ≪ "mysstream is: " ≪ mysstream.str(); // newline contained
}
```

### 1.7.5 Formatting

Use `set()` to align values for readability. 

Use `<< set fill('-') << left` to set the values to be left aligned.

Other notations:

-  `scientific` for normalized exponential representation
-  `oct` for octal
-  `hex ` for hexadecimal
-  `dec` for decimal
- `boolalpha` for present boolean values as true or false

### 1.7.6 C++20 New Formatting (Refer to CppReference)

We advise **against** using printf, for two reasons: 

- it can't be used with user types
- it is not type safe

### 1.7.7 Dealing with I/O Errors

**I/O in C++ is not fail-safe**, so our error handling must comply to them.

By default, the streams do not throw exceptions, becuase they are older than the exceptions.

If we want to use exceptions, we have to enable them during run time for each stream: 

```c++
cin.exceptions(ios_base::badbit | ios_base::failbit);
cout.exceptions(ios_base::badbit | ios_base::failbit);

std::ifstream infile("f.txt");
infile.exceptions(ios_base::badbit | ios_base::failbit);
```

For checking the opening operation, we have to create the stream first, then turn on the exceptions, and finally open the file explicitly. 

However, the exceptions in file I/O only protect us **partially** from making errors (e.g., types don't match and numbers aren't separated). 

**At any rate, the I/O part of an application needs close attention.** Numbers must be sedated properly and read with the same type as they were written. Floating-point values can also very in their local representation and it is therefore recommended to store and read them without internationalization when the program will run on different systems. 

### 1.7.8 C++17 Filesystem

With the library `<filesystem>`, we can list all files in a directory and ask for their type. 

The library also allows us to copy files, create symbolic and head links, and rename fiels directly within a C++ program in a portable manner. 
