# Chapter 1. C++ Basics

## 1.8 Arrays, Pointers, and References

### 1.8.2 Pointers

A pointer is a variable that contains a memory address: 

- &x
- Dynamically allocated memory

When dealing with dynamically allocated arrays, the programmer should: 

- store the array size
- release the memory when it is not needed anymore
- the single-object allocation requires a single-object release, and the array allocation demands an array release

**Referencing & Dereferencing**

`&`: takes an object and returns its address

`*`: takes an address and returns an object

In C++11, pointers that are not initialized contain a random value, so we should explicitly initialize a pointer when declaring it. C++11 introduces `nullptr` as a keyword for a pointer literal, which is the preferred notation. 

**Memory Leaks**

```c++
int* y = new int[10];
// some stuff
y = new int[15];  // old memoey is still there but we have no access to it anymore. 
```

### 1.8.3 Smart Pointers

The problem with Raw Pointers is that we have no notion whether a pointer is only referring to data or also in charge of releasing the memory when it is not needed any longer. To make this distinction explicit at the type level, we can use smart pointers. 

#### 1.8.3.1 Unique Pointer

```c++
{
	unique_ptr<double> dp{new double};
  *dp = 7;
  ...
}
```

The memory is automatically released when the pointer expires. Therefore, **it is a bug to assign address that are not allocated dynamically.** 

**Unique Ownership:** A unique_ptr cannot be copies, but we can transfer the memory location to another unique_ptr: 

```c++
unique_ptr<double> dp2{dp};  // Error: no copy allowed

unique_ptr<double> dp2{move(dp)}, dp3;  // dp is nullptr afterward
dp3 = move(dp2);  // dp2 is nullptr afterward
```

**An important benefit of unique_ptr is that it has absolutely no overhead over raw pointers: neither in time nor in memory.** 

#### 1.8.3.2 Shared Pointer

A shared_ptr manages memory that is shared between multiple parties (each holding a pointer to it). The memory is automatically released as soon as no shared_ptr is referring the data any longer. In concurrency: the memory is automatically freed when all threads have terminated their access to it. 

A shared_ptr can be copied: 

```c++
shared_ptr<double> f()
{
  shared_ptr<double> p1{new double};
  shared_ptr<double> p2{new double}, p3 = p1;
  cout << "p3.use_count() = " << p3.use_count() << endl;  // 2
}

int main() 
{
  shared_ptr<double> p = f();
  cout << "p.use_count() = " << p.use_count() << endl;  // 1
}
```

When `f()` returns, the pointers are destroyed and the memory referred to by p2 is released. The second allocated memory block still exists since p from the main function is still referring to it. 

A shared_ptr should be created with `make_shared`. In this way, the internal (manager, counter) and the user data are stored together in memory, and the memory caching is more efficient:

```c++
shared_ptr<double>p1 = make_shared<double>();
```

A shared_ptr has some overhead in memory and run time. 

#### 1.8.3.3 Weak Pointer

A problem that can occur with shared pointers is Cyclic Reference that impede the memory to be released. Such cycles can be broken by weak_ptrs. They do not claim ownership of the memory, not even a shared one. 

### 1.8.6 Do Not Refer to Outdated Data

The main advantage of pointers over reference is the ability of dynamic memory management and address calculation. On the other hand, references are forced to refer to existing locations. 

**Stale References:** References to variables that no longer exist are called Stale References. 

```c++
double& square_ref(double d)  // Error: returns stale reference
{
  double s = d * d;
  return s;  // Error: s will be out of scope
}
```

The memory where `s` was stored is still there and we might be lucky (mistakenly) that it is not overwritten yet. But this is nothing we can count on => memory corruption. 

The same applies to pointers: The pointer holds the address of a local variable that has already gone out of scope is called a **Dangling Pointer**: 

```c++
double* square_ptr(double d)  // Error: returns dangling pointer
{
  double s = d * d;
  return &s;  // Error: s will be out of scope
}
```

### 1.8.7 Containers for Arrays

#### 1.8.7.2 Valarray

One-dimensional array with element-wise operations; even the multiplication is performed element-wise. Operations with a scalar value are performed respectively with each element of the valarray. 

```c++
std::valarray<float> v = {1, 2, 3}, w = {7, 8, 9}, s = v + 0.2f * w;
v = sin(s);
```

Note: a `valarray<float>` can only operate with itself or float. So `2 * w` would fail since it is an unsupported multiplication of int with `valarray<float>`. 

